Add readme for specifying the scope of the working group (#1)
ros-maritime/community: README.md

> # ROS 2 Maritime Robotics Working Group

Reviewer: I noticed in the meeting that a majority of people are using ROS 1. If this WG is exclusively ROS 2, I think it will lose a big portion of the audience. People have legitimate reasons to use ROS 1, and there is a huge maritime ecosystem already in ROS 1, including uuv_simulator. It would be difficult to draw the line for, what should be discussion topics that are specifically ROS 2, can it only be about porting and not about developing new features in ROS 1, or do those new features have to be eventually ported to ROS 2 to qualify for discussion in this WG, etc.

The other sanity check is, if this WG is ROS 2, then does it make sense to have another WG for just ROS 1? Since there's so much overlap in the concept and tools, I think it's more beneficial to be inclusive.

A general note, when we write high-level documentation at Open Robotics, we don't specify ROS 1 or 2, we just write ROS, because in the future, you might have ROS 3, 4, etc. ROS is the name of the thing, and the number is just a version. I would suggest considering that mindset here.

Reviewer 2: :+1: Most of the community is still on ROS 1 we should support both ROS 1 and ROS 2 and ROS *

Author: Thank you for the insight! Yeah, now I come to realize that would be a problem to only have ROS2 tools. I'll also change that in the documentation and talk about it in the next meeting. Thank you!

This document defines the scope and governance of the Working Group (WG).

Mission: To unite, create and upgrade generic maritime robotics solutions that can be easily deployed in maritime robots. 

> Scope: ROS 2 packages related to maritime robotics specificities of any robotics field: control, simulation, drivers... 

Reviewer: Is it still the plan to include both underwater and surface? That's probably one of the first questions someone would wonder about (I went and Ctrl+F for "surface" and didn't find it, but I did find many "underwater" keywords). It would be good to state that scope clearly near the top.

Reviewer 2: There seems to be reference to Virtual RobotX so presumably surface should also be part of it?

Author: Yes yes, of course. Even though they have some differences, both use similar sensors, actuators, have similar dynamics... It makes more sense to develop things for both of them.

Author: Done in c5f0149f170fbc09cfc1cf82a6c53841c645778f

The following subprojects are owned by the Working Group:

* Communication
  * Description: Packages for underwater network wireless communication.
  * Motive: Since underwater communications relies on acoustic waves, there are some specificities regarding these types of waves that should be taken into account during data transmission.
  * Repositories
    * Suggestions...
  * References: 

>     *  [ns uan](https://www.nsnam.org/docs/models/html/uan.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *  [ns UAN](https://www.nsnam.org/docs/models/html/uan.html)
```

* Common Messages
  * Description: Specifics ROS messages for maritime robotics.

>   * Motive: There are maritime robotics sensors that gives specific type of messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Description: Specific ROS messages for maritime robotics.
  * Motive: There are maritime robotics sensors that give specific types of messages.
```

  * Unique Repo
    *  Assist the development of [UW APL Hydrographic Messages](https://github.com/apl-ocean-engineering/hydrographic_msgs)

* Drivers
  * Description: Documentation and index for underwater sensors and actuators drivers.

>   * Motive: There are specifics components used only for maritime robotics, which requires drivers to interact with them. Although, there already is an ROS organization to develop ROS drivers, so instead of developing inside this organization, we would use it just to have an index describing maritimate focused ROS drivers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Motive: There are specific components used only for maritime robotics, which requires drivers to interact with them. Although, there already is an ROS organization to develop ROS drivers, so instead of developing inside this organization, we would use it just to have an index describing maritimate focused ROS drivers.
```

  * Unique Repo
    * **[Proposal]** ROS Maritime Robotics Drivers Index

>     * **[Proposal]** Sonar and radar drivers

Reviewer 2: Would be worth looking at existing sonar and radar drivers and standards. For instance a lot of maritime RADARs use the Asterix protocol. Also there are ros drivers available for some low end sonars like that https://github.com/CentraleNantesRobotics/ping360_sonar

Author: But how would that change the charter?  What I meant by that is that we have a repo only for indexing the available drivers and to also code drivers in case needed.

  * References: 
    *  [ROS Drivers](https://github.com/ros-drivers)

* Documentation
  * Description: Documentation and index for maritime robotics packages and organizations.
  * Motive: There are already many organizations and repos for maritime robotics. It is important to map what it is already developed in the area as well as make tutorials for newcomers or people that want to contribute with maritime robotics development.
  * Repositories
    * **[Proposal]** ROS Maritime Robotics Documentation Index
    * **[Proposal]** ROS Maritime Robotics Tutorials
  * References: 
    * [COLA2](https://iquarobotics.com/cola2): ROS and Gazebo

>     * [VRX](https://github.com/osrf/vrx): ROS and Gazebo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * [Virtual RobotX (VRX)](https://github.com/osrf/vrx): ROS and Gazebo
```

    * [UUV Simulator](https://uuvsimulator.github.io/): ROS and Gazebo
    * [Plankton](https://github.com/Liquid-ai/Plankton): ROS2 and Gazebo

>     * [Ignition native underwater vehicles](https://ignitionrobotics.org/api/gazebo/5.0/underwater_vehicles.html): Ignition 

Reviewer: Latest link for Ignition Garden (6.4 right now)
```suggestion
    * [Ignition native underwater vehicles](https://ignitionrobotics.org/api/gazebo/6.4/underwater_vehicles.html): Ignition 
```

    * [MBARI Vehicle Simulated in Ignition](https://github.com/osrf/lrauv/): Ignition 
    * [Project Dave](https://github.com/Field-Robotics-Lab/dave/wiki): ROS and Gazebo

>     * [DS SIM](https://bitbucket.org/whoidsl/ds_sim/src/master/): ROS and Gazebo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * [MBARI LRAUV simulated in Ignition](https://github.com/osrf/lrauv/): Ignition 
    * [NPS Project DAVE](https://github.com/Field-Robotics-Lab/dave/wiki): ROS and Gazebo
    * [WHOI Deep Submergence Lab ds_sim](https://bitbucket.org/whoidsl/ds_sim/src/master/): ROS and Gazebo
```

    * [UW APL Hydrographic Messages](https://github.com/apl-ocean-engineering/hydrographic_msgs): ROS
  
* Dynamic Model
  * Description: Packages related to estimation and iteration of maritime robots models.

>   * Motive: Maritime robots dynamical models have to take into account buoayancy, hydrodynamics... Therefore some packages regarding math models are needed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Motive: Maritime robots dynamical models have to take into account buoyancy, hydrodynamics... Therefore some packages regarding math models are needed. 
```

  * Repositories

>     * **[Proposal]** Maritime vehicle model estimation based on URDF

Reviewer 2: Repeat?

Author: No... Maybe I wasn't very clear. The model estimation with URDF it would be using tools for calculating the parameters using the meshes. The other would be based on experiments. The last one is just a model of the vehicle node to receive the current states, a period of time and then predict the next states based on the equations.

      * Use vehicle mesh and parameters to estimate the Fossen equation of motion parameters
    * **[Proposal]** Maritime vehicle estimation based experiments

>       * Use control, pose and velocity bags and URDF to estimate the Fossen equation of motion parameters

Reviewer 2: This feels like a research field on its own.

Author: Yeah it does 😅, but it is something which would be very useful. This was done already in some papers, but I couldn't find anything opensource...

    * **[Proposal]** Maritime vehicle model

>       * Use vehicle equations of motion to predict robot next position and velocity. This can be used with localization and control algorithms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * Use vehicle equations of motion to predict the robot's next position and velocity. This can be used with localization and control algorithms.
```

  * References: 

>     *  Python lib that estimates added mass: [Capytaine](https://github.com/mancellin/capytaine)

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we should add tools for experimental methods also? TBH caluclating hydrodynamic models from CAD is an incredibly complex field. While it'd be really nice to do this I don't know if we have the resources.

    *  [OpenFoam](https://www.openfoam.com/)

* Guidance, Navigation and Control (GNC)  

>   * Description: Packages for gnc of maritime robots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Description: Packages for GNC of maritime robots.
```

>   * Motive: There are some control and tasks specifics to maritime robots, such as thruster control allocation, surveilance, vessels handling of tides...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Motive: There are some controls and tasks specifics to maritime robots, such as thruster control allocation, surveillance, vessels' handling of tides...
```

  * Repositories
    * **[Proposal]** Thruster manager
  * References: 

>     *  [Plankton thruster manager](https://github.com/Liquid-ai/Plankton/blob/master/uuv_control/uuv_thruster_manager/src/uuv_thrusters/thruster_manager.py)

Reviewer 3: Is this a duplicate of the proposal to create generic robot controllers?

> * Localization

Reviewer 2: With regards to this section, this is a pretty major task. There are multiple possible ways in which a vehicle shall localize. Are we focused on the underwater (harder) or surface use case (easier). If so what sensors? Also what are available benchmarks and datasets.

  * Description: Packages to localize maritime vehicles.

>   * Motive: Underwater vehicles have a lot of differences regarding the sensors they can use for localizing theirselves. GPS does not works underwater, as well as lidars or electromagnetic waves for long distances... But acoustic waves work pretty well, so underwater localization rely more on sensors like DVL and Sonar, that uses acoustic waves to measure distance and velocity.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Motive: Underwater vehicles have a lot of differences regarding the sensors they can use for localizing themselves. GPS does not work underwater, as well as lidars or electromagnetic waves for long distances... But acoustic waves work pretty well, so underwater localization rely more on sensors like DVL and Sonar, that uses acoustic waves to measure distance and velocity.  
```

  * Repositories:
    * **[Proposal]**: Multilateration of acoustic beacons
  * References: 

>     *  [Mesh Navigation](https://github.com/uos/mesh_navigation)

Reviewer 2: How is this maritime related?

    *  [Fuse Localization](https://github.com/uos/mesh_navigation)

>     *  [MagNav](https://www.gpsworld.com/us-air-force-to-explore-navigating-with-magnetism/)

Reviewer 2: This feels like an arbitrary tech demonstrator.

* Perception
  * Description: Packages for perception algorithms for maritime robotics.

>   * Motive: Since there are different sensors such as sonars, there is a need to process this data to obtain information. Moreover, it can be created some common structures detection.

Reviewer: Grammatical error in the last sentence here

  * Repositories:

>     * **[Proposal]**: Common Maritime Environments Detections (buoys, valves, pipes...)

Reviewer 2: Should datasets be part of this section?

Reviewer 4: that would make sense, although it would be more a list of external sources

    * **[Proposal]**: Fusion of sonar and camera data
  * References: 
    * Suggestions...
   
* Robots
  * Description: Packages with maritime robots and structures.

>   * Motive: All the software being develop shall have not only unit tests but integration tests, so robots and structures shall be developed for this purporse. These shall include vcstool for specifying packages to be used with the robot as well as ros_ign_bridge to test it on simulation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Motive: All the software being developed shall have not only unit tests but integration tests, so robots and structures shall be developed for this purpose. These shall include vcstool for specifying packages to be used with the robot as well as ros_ign_bridge to test it in simulation.
```

  * Repositories

>     * **[Proposal]** Hover type UW vehicle

Reviewer 2: What about surface vessels. Also these feel like "robot models". The simulation plugins would look the same across the board. Maybe controllers may be a bit diff.

Reviewer 4: USV's should be included for sure!

    * **[Proposal]** Torpedo shaped UW vehicle
    * **[Proposal]** USV

>     * **[Proposal]** Intervention UW vehicle 

Reviewer 3: My reading of this is that this aims to provide control-level software for each of these different control schemas. It seems like there's an opportunity here to more effectively leverage existing ROS code: rather than providing each of these as repositories it may make sense to try to implement these in the existing [ros_control repo](https://github.com/ros-controls/ros_controllers) using the same intefaces for mobile platforms, which take in command velocities and provide odometry.

Although the typical usage for these is 2 dimensional, the interfaces themselves do support 3 dimensions. This also would cover [mabelzhang's question](https://github.com/ros-maritime/community/pull/1/files#r804976479) about "should this also cover surface-based robots": all the boats I can think of could be described as being controlled with either differential, ackerman, or holonomic controllers, all of which are already implemented.

  * References: 
    *  Intervention UW sample [RexROV2](https://uuvsimulator.github.io/packages/rexrov2/intro/)

>     *  Torpedo Shaped UW vehicle [lrauv](https://github.com/osrf/lrauv/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *  Torpedo Shaped UW vehicle [LRAUV](https://github.com/osrf/lrauv/)
```

   
* Simulation
  * Description: Documentation and index for maritime robotics Ignition plugins.

>   * Motive: There is no need to mix ros code with simulation, also there is already some maritime robotics development in Ignition, so is a good thing to contribute to ign-plugin repo instead of creating other in this organization.

Reviewer: I think this section means `ign-gazebo` repo, not the `ign-plugin` repo.
The [`ign-plugin`](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-plugin) repo is the functionality library to make plugins work in Ignition.
The [`ign-gazebo`](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-gazebo) repo is where we actually write application plugins, as system plugins in `src/systems`.

```suggestion
  * Motive: There is no need to mix ROS code with simulation, also there is already some maritime robotics development in Ignition, so it is a good thing to contribute to ign-gazebo repo instead of creating other in this organization.
```

  * Repositories

>     * **[Proposal]** Maritime Robotics Ignition Plugins Index

Reviewer 2: Rather than different repos we probably shouldshould maintain a table of features which maritime simulators should have and link to relevant PRs/Documentation. Something like:

| Feature | Ignition | Gazebo
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| Doppler Velocity Log |  Under Development |  [ds_sim](https://github.com/Field-Robotics-Lab/ds_sim/blob/nps_dev/gazebo_src/dsros_dvl.cc)  |
| Imaging Sonar |  Not available  |  [NPS](https://github.com/Field-Robotics-Lab/nps_uw_multibeam_sonar) |
| RADAR | Not available | Not available |
| Waves | Under Development | [Virtual RobotX](https://github.com/osrf/vrx), [ASV Wavesim](https://github.com/srmainwaring/asv_wave_sim/tree/feature/fft_waves) |  
| Acoustic Comms | Under Development | ??? |
| USBL | ??? | ??? |
| LBL | ??? | ??? |
| Ocean Currents | Upstream since fortress |  UUV, Plankton, ds_sim |
| Hydrodyamics |  | |

Theres more stuff like wind, sails, tethers that I have not included above but are important to include.

If there are ever other simulators that come along we should add them. We probably should eventually link each of these sensors to some documentation about the sensor itself.

Reviewer: A bit of addition and correction to the table:
- DVL is available in all of uuv_sim, ds_sim, DAVE, and UWSim https://wiki.ros.org/uwsim
- Imaging sonar for Gazebo should be this one from uuv_sim, with additional documentation on the DAVE Wiki https://github.com/Field-Robotics-Lab/dave/wiki/image_sonar_description
  The multibeam sonar in DAVE is a very unique physics-based raytracing sonar, in contrast to the conventional sonar simulations that simulate an image. Though it also produces an image, it simulates the physics. It should be on a different row.
- USBL in Gazebo is available in DAVE https://github.com/Field-Robotics-Lab/dave/wiki/usbl_tutorial and ds_sim

Probably logical to swap the Gazebo and Ignition columns so that Gazebo, which came first, is on the left. It would resemble the Gz/Ign feature comparison page https://ignitionrobotics.org/docs/fortress/comparison

One thing I noticed is that these are just umbrella terms, and even if a simulator says it has it, it might be talking about something completely different from another simulator in terms of maturity (which relates to age and how actively maintained it is), sophistication, and functionality. That kind of information would best be captured outside the table, if that's something this document wants to capture.

Alternatively, this table could be captured in a different document, since this is the charter document and requires a lot of approvals to revise in the future.

Reviewer 5: Hi :) I registered for the presentation about the Imaging sonar. As @mabelzhang describes, the [multibeam sonar plugin at Dave](https://github.com/Field-Robotics-Lab/nps_uw_multibeam_sonar) output sonar image but it's quite a different one.

    * **[Proposal]** Wave Simulation (repo shall be in ign-plugins)
    * **[Proposal]** Acoustics Simulation (repo shall be in ign-plugins) (Include salinity and temperature effects)
    * **[Proposal]** Radar Simulation (repo shall be in ign-plugins)
    * **[Proposal]** Sonar Simulation (repo shall be in ign-plugins)
  * References: 

>     *  [ASV Wave Simulator](https://github.com/srmainwaring/asv_wave_sim/tree/feature/fft_waves)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *  [ASV Wave Simulator](https://github.com/srmainwaring/asv_wave_sim/tree/feature/fft_waves)
    *  [ign-gazebo](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-gazebo)
```

* Tools
  * Description: Extra category for packages that do something specific that don't fit in any other category
  * Motive: There might be some tools that can be developed for maritime robotics that doesn't fit another category, such as geographic information convertion. 
  * Repositories
    * **[Proposal]** Geographic convertions
  * References: 
    *  Suggestions...

> ### Standards for subprojects

Reviewer: Some of the items on this list are pretty ambitious and require a lot of maintenance effort. I don't know how the WG will enforce this, or how strict it should be. It can be difficult to check all these boxes.

Lower sections (because I can't add separate comments to existing lines not in this PR) mention unanimous approvals from Approvers. How many Approvers are there going to be? Unanimous might not be the best strategy - what if someone is on leave for a month? Frankly, I don't know how other WGs handle this, but there should be flexibility built in for such situations. Maybe a specific number of percentage of Approvers.

Author: Sure! What do you think it would be the best strategy? I though about throwing here every idea that we may develop in the future, even if it is 2 or 3 years later... @arjo129 commented about having a road-map to better clarify when we are going to tackle each problem.

About the approval, I changed it to 2, what do you think? I think that if at least two approvers agree that the PR was good, then it is enough.

Reviewer: I see. I think the ones requiring the most effort on this list are setting up things with the build farm, making sure things are green (this can take a lot of engineering time), and making sure somebody is doing the releases. While the setup is a one-time effort, the others are routine maintenance and require people to commit regularly.

Other things like maintaining backlog, tickets receiving prompt responses, these are active development tasks that might benefit from triaging during meeting time. (Just one idea I heard some WGs do. May or may not apply to this WG.)

It'd be good to gauge commitment levels at the next meeting, to see how ready people are to commit to some of these. Of course, there isn't much work to do maintenance-wise before people figure out who's developing what features, so this section could be a WIP for now, until people figure out what works and modify this.

My original comment just wanted to point out that this list of standards can take a lot of effort, and some of them might be marked as tentative, or maybe there should be a note saying it's best effort, or up to modifications until a certain point, etc. Basically in the beginning it should be easy to change, without being abused later to turn into, "if the WG can't tackle something, then just go change the charter," if you know what I mean.

Re road map: Yeah, we were talking about road maps as the next steps for the community in general, because there has already been a few community meetings in the past year where people come and talk about what they do, but nothing moves on from there. A road map doesn't need to have strict calendar dates, if the WG isn't quite ready for that. Another way is to have an effort estimate table/list - whether something will take days, weeks, months. Yet another way is to have a table of "tentative assignments," if you think people are ready to commit to developing certain features at this time. That could be good if they are already doing something and are willing to contribute to open source.

Re approval number: Yeah, I think 2 should be fine. We use 2 for rosdistro rosdep approvals, which is kinda important. If it's good enough for that, it should be good enough for this.

Author: Regarding the ROS build farm, setting CI and such, I don't have experience with that. Do you have a package and links so I can better understand this?

@arjo129 has created the issue tracking and the project for better organization

I didn't understand much your comment about the charter. Do you think that is better if we reduce the scope and change it as we think we can tackle something instead of listing everything we might be able to do?

Reviewer: rosdistro is a good starting point, if that is the desired outcome. I believe some people (UNH) in the monthly meetings have experience Bloom releasing their packages to rosdistro and getting them distributed.
https://github.com/ros/rosdistro/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md
I'm not on regular rosdistro duty anymore as of couple months ago, but I can try to answer questions based on what I know.

Yeah the language of the charter seems pretty strict. In principle, if something is in the charter, then it seems to suggest that it's something that should be done. If it isn't done, then it shouldn't be in the charter - it should be in an issue to be later added to the charter once resources are found. The charter shouldn't be a wish list, in my opinion. People would read the charter with the understanding that this is the standard of the WG and everything is carried out. It should include what's actually being done. Otherwise, there's no way for anyone to tell what is actually being done, and what is just aspirations.

    * **[Proposal]**: Fusion of sonar and camera data
  * References: 
    * Suggestions...
   
* Robots
  * Description: Packages with maritime robots and structures.
  * Motive: All the software being developed shall have not only unit tests but integration tests, so robots and structures shall be developed for this purpose. These shall include vcstool for specifying packages to be used with the robot as well as ros_ign_bridge to test it in simulation.
  * Repositories
    * **[Proposal]** Hover type UW vehicle
    * **[Proposal]** Torpedo shaped UW vehicle
    * **[Proposal]** USV
    * **[Proposal]** Intervention UW vehicle 
  * References: 
    *  Intervention UW sample [RexROV2](https://uuvsimulator.github.io/packages/rexrov2/intro/)
    *  Torpedo Shaped UW vehicle [LRAUV](https://github.com/osrf/lrauv/)
   
* Simulation
  * Description: Documentation and index for maritime robotics Ignition plugins.
  * Motive: There is no need to mix ROS code with simulation, also there is already some maritime robotics development in Ignition, so it is a good thing to contribute to ign-gazebo repo instead of creating other in this organization.
  * Repositories

>     * **[Proposal]** Maritime Robotics Ignition Plugins Index

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    * **[Proposal]** Maritime Robotics Gazebo Plugins Index
```

Author: Fixed in 37ccbb7c1737ee3fa30bad63e5eae87a980d46f2

    * **[Proposal]** Wave Simulation (repo shall be in ign-plugins)
    * **[Proposal]** Acoustics Simulation (repo shall be in ign-plugins) (Include salinity and temperature effects)
    * **[Proposal]** Radar Simulation (repo shall be in ign-plugins)
    * **[Proposal]** Sonar Simulation (repo shall be in ign-plugins)
  * References: 
    *  [ASV Wave Simulator](https://github.com/srmainwaring/asv_wave_sim/tree/feature/fft_waves)

>     *  [ign-gazebo](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-gazebo)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    *  [Gazebo Sim](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-sim)
```

Author: Fixed in 37ccbb7c1737ee3fa30bad63e5eae87a980d46f2

### Meetings

* Regular WG Meeting: First Tuesday of every month at 8AM PST

>   * Meetings Annoucement: One week before the meeting at ROS Discourse

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Meetings Announcement: One week before the meeting at ROS Discourse
```

>   * Outputs of the meetings: Recording and minutes of the meeting at ROS Discorse

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Outputs of the meetings: Recording and minutes of the meeting at ROS Discourse
```

### Communication Channels

* Instant messaging: [Matrix community](https://matrix.to/#/#ros-maritime:matrix.org) (Matrix is an open network for secure, decentralized communication).
* Google Group: [Meeting invite group](https://groups.google.com/g/maritime-robotics-working-group-invites)

> * Github organization: [ros-#### Form_1: Navigation and control stack? How to use Nav2 alongside control, perception...

Reviewer: This line has a syntax error that's propagating to the rest of the section.

Author: Oh my... Thanks!
